Aim:

To study various network devices in detail and to connect computers in a Local Area Network (LAN).


Network Devices and Their Functions

1. Repeater

A repeater is a device used to regenerate and amplify weak signals in a network.

It operates at the Physical Layer (Layer 1) of the OSI model.

Used when the network cable is very long and the signal becomes weak.

Helps extend the range of a LAN.

Example: Used between two buildings to boost Ethernet signal.

2. Hub

A hub is a basic network device that connects multiple computers in a LAN.

Works at the Physical Layer (Layer 1).

It broadcasts incoming data to all connected ports, causing collisions.

Not secure and slower compared to a switch.

Example: Small home networks (older).

3. Bridge

A bridge operates at the Data Link Layer (Layer 2).

Used to connect two LAN segments and reduce traffic.

It uses MAC addresses to filter traffic.

Helps in dividing a big network into smaller collision domains.

Example: Connecting two departments in a building.

4. Switch

A switch is an advanced device that connects multiple computers in a LAN.

Works at Layer 2 (Data Link).

Unlike a hub, it forwards data only to the intended device, using MAC addresses.

Reduces collisions and increases efficiency.

Example: Used in modern office networks.

5. Router

A router operates at the Network Layer (Layer 3).

It connects multiple networks (LAN-to-LAN, LAN-to-Internet).

Uses IP addresses to route packets.

Supports NAT, DHCP, and security features.

Example: Wi-Fi router at home.

6. Gateway

A gateway is a device that connects different types of networks using different protocols.

Works across all OSI layers.

Performs protocol conversion.

Allows communication between dissimilar networks.

Example: Email gateway, VoIP gateway.

7. NIC (Network Interface Card)

A NIC is a hardware component installed in every computer.

It provides the physical interface to connect to the network.

Has a unique MAC address.

Available as Ethernet and Wireless NIC.

Example: RJ45 Ethernet port in desktops.

8. Browser (You marked this with a red line — so I’ll explain it simply)

A browser is NOT a networking device, but a software application.

It is used to access and view websites over the network.

Examples: Chrome, Firefox.

(If your sir asked to remove it, you can strike it off.)

9. Modem

Modem stands for Modulator–Demodulator.

Converts digital signals ↔ analog signals.

Required when using telephone/cable lines to connect to the Internet.

Used to provide WAN connectivity.

Example: BSNL/ACT broadband modem.

Steps to Connect a LAN

Step 1: Physical Connection

1. Connect each computer’s NIC to the switch using LAN cables.


2. Ensure cables are inserted properly into RJ45 ports.


3. If using a router, connect the router’s LAN port to the switch.


Step 2: Assign IP Addresses

You can assign static IPs manually:

For each system:

Go to Control Panel → Network & Internet → Network Adapter Settings

Right click Ethernet → Properties → IPv4

Set:

IP Address: 192.168.1.x

Subnet Mask: 255.255.255.0

Default Gateway: 192.168.1.1 (router)


Step 3: Test Connectivity

Use ping command:

ping 192.168.1.3

If reply is received → LAN is working.


Step 4: File and Resource Sharing (Optional)

Enable file sharing.

Share folders or printers across the LAN.


Result:

Successfully studied network devices in detail and connected multiple computers in a Local Area Network (LAN).

