Aim:

To study various network devices in detail and to connect computers in a Local Area Network (LAN).


Network Devices and Their Functions

1. Network Interface Card (NIC)

It is the hardware component that allows a computer to connect to a network.

Available as wired (Ethernet) or wireless (Wi-Fi).

Each NIC has a unique MAC address.

Converts data into electrical/optical signals.

2. Hub

A simple networking device used in small LANs.

Works at Physical Layer (Layer 1).

Broadcasts data to all connected devices, causing collisions.

Not secure and less efficient.

3. Switch

Works at Data Link Layer (Layer 2).

Uses MAC addresses to forward frames only to the destination device.

Reduces collision; supports full duplex.

Widely used in modern LANs.

4. Router

Operates at Network Layer (Layer 3).

Connects different networks (LAN-to-WAN, LAN-to-Internet).

Uses IP address for routing.

Performs NAT, DHCP, firewall functionalities.

5. Modem

Converts digital signals to analog and vice-versa.

Required when using telephone lines or broadband connections.

Used for connecting LAN to the Internet.

6. Access Point (AP)

Provides wireless (Wi-Fi) connectivity.

Extends the LAN without cables.

Provides mobility to users (laptops, mobiles).

7. Repeater

Used to extend the LAN distance.

Amplifies or regenerates weak signals.

8. Gateway

Operates at all 7 layers.

Used to connect networks using different architectures or protocols.

Example: VoIP gateway, email gateway.



Steps to Connect a LAN

Step 1: Physical Connection

1. Connect each computer’s NIC to the switch using LAN cables.


2. Ensure cables are inserted properly into RJ45 ports.


3. If using a router, connect the router’s LAN port to the switch.


Step 2: Assign IP Addresses

You can assign static IPs manually:

For each system:

Go to Control Panel → Network & Internet → Network Adapter Settings

Right click Ethernet → Properties → IPv4

Set:

IP Address: 192.168.1.x

Subnet Mask: 255.255.255.0

Default Gateway: 192.168.1.1 (router)


Step 3: Test Connectivity

Use ping command:

ping 192.168.1.3

If reply is received → LAN is working.


Step 4: File and Resource Sharing (Optional)

Enable file sharing.

Share folders or printers across the LAN.


Result:

Successfully studied network devices in detail and connected multiple computers in a Local Area Network (LAN).

